# Utilizing-gene-expression-data-for-discovery-of-molecular-biomarkers-for-Alzheimer-s-disease
Exploratory Analysis of Genomic Biomarkers for  Severe Alzheimer’s Disease in R 

This repository contains files/code for Georgetown HIDS 7003 (Precision Health Informatics) Midterm Project. This project investigates the potential biomarkers and novel drug targets for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). I analyzed and made sense of the gene expression data generated from human brain tissue samples, including (a) normal controls and (d) severely affected subjects.

Introduction:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and degenerative brain disorder, characterized by distinct stages. The last stage or severe stage, which impacts one’s life the most, is characterized by severe cognitive decline, loss of motor skills, and an increased need for full-time care. Individuals may be nonverbal, unable to recognize loved ones, and experience significant memory loss. They may require assistance with all aspects of daily living.

Steps:
1) Conducted differential gene expression analysis (in R) to generate differentiallly expressed genes (DEGs) between groups of subjects at severe stage of AD vs. normal control.
  - Ran T-test to obtain set of DEGs

2) Conducted a systems biology level analysis of the list of DEGs (generated in step 1 and filtered on p-value <=0.01)
   - Using list of DEGs as an input to enrichR function

3) Utilize results generated by enrichR (such as Pathway enrichment analysis and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis) to develop a biological interpretation of the results with the goal of narrowing down the number of genes, pathways, and biological categories that seem to be most relevant to the organ (brain) function, cell types (neurons etc) and disease (AD) 
